Authors
-------

S. Abbott (1), J. Hellewell (1), J. Munday (1), CMMID nCoV working group
(1), S. Funk (1)

Correspondence to:
<a href="mailto:sam.abbott@lshtm.ac.uk" class="email">sam.abbott@lshtm.ac.uk</a>

Affiliations
------------

1.  Center for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London
    School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, United
    Kingdom

Introduction
------------

The ongoing pneumonia outbreak appears to have originated from an
initial point-source exposure event at Huanan seafood wholesale market
in Wuhan, China which was closed on the 31st of December 2019 \[1,2\].
As of the 26th of January 2020 there have been over 2000 confirmed cases
with the majority in China \[3\]. Globally, countries are on high alert
with wide implementation of airport checks and contact tracing. In
China, officials have restricted travel across a wide area. There is
still uncertainty around the precise scale and duration of the initial
exposure event \[4\]. This has implications for the likely
transmissibility of coronavirus and as such it is important that these
potential scenarios are further explored.

We used a stochastic branching process model - parameterised with
available data where possible and otherwise informed by the 2002-2003
SARS outbreak - to simulate the Wuhan outbreak. We considered a range of
parameters where data were not available, quantifying how likely these
scenarios were to occur using reported cases. We focused on the size and
duration of the initial exposure event in particular, and the impact
this has on the estimated level of human-to-human transmission. We aimed
to provide decision makers, and researchers, with probability estimates
for each scenario considered, along with estimates of the reproduction
number (R0) across all scenarios.

Methods
-------

**Branching process model**

We modelled the outbreak using a stochastic branching comparable to
those used elsewhere \[4\]. We assumed that cases from the initial
transmission event were uniformly distributed over the duration of the
event. Each case then resulted in a subsequent generation of cases with
the number that each case generated being drawn from a negative binomial
distribution - to account for overdisperion - with a dispersion
parameter k of 0.16 (assuming SARS-like dispersion) \[5\]. The mean
number of cases generated by each case (R0) was sampled from a uniform
distribution once per model simulation with a lower and upper bound
determined by the scenario being evaluated. Generations were then
sampled iteratively until the maximum simulation time was reached. The
serial interval between each generation was assumed to be normal with a
mean varied during the scenario analysis and a standard deviation of 3.8
(assumed SARS-like) \[5\]. After the simulation of the branching process
reporting delays were added as reported in a line-list of cases compiled
from media and other reports \[6\]. We fitted a geometric, Poisson, and
a negative binomial distribution to these observed delays and selected
the best fit using the Chi-squared statistic. If no good fit was
determined - using a p-value threshold of 0.05 - then the reporting
delay was instead sampled from the empirical delays in the line-list.

**Scenario analysis**

We simulated the branching process model 10,000 times for all
combinations of the following parameters: number of confirmed cases
resulting from the initial exposure (20, 40, 60, 80, 200, 400), initial
expsoure event duration (7 days, 14 days, 21 days, and 28 days), the
mean of the serial interval (4 days, 8.4 days \[5\], 12)), and R0 (lower
and upper bounds of a uniform distribution: 0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-4).
Parameter values used in the scenario analysis were either assumptions
based on the current knowledge of the Wuhan outbreak or based on those
used previously for SARS \[5\]. We ran the model from the beginning of
the outbreak for each scenario until the 25th of January 2020. The start
date was determined by combining the duration of the transmission event
with the date the fish market in Wuhan - the source of the outbreak -
closed (31st of December 2019). We evaluated each scenario sample based
on the cases observed on the 25th of January (1975). Samples were
rejected if their simulated cumulative case estimates were outside a 5%
interval on either side of this. Outbreak simulation was stopped if a
sample exceeded the upper bound on the number of observed cases.

**Analysis**

We compared the percentage of samples that were accepted stratified by
the transmission event size, transmission event duration, mean serial
interval, and R0 using a heat map. We then compared the distribution of
R0 for accepted samples by transmission event size, transmission event
duration and mean serial interval. We reported 90% credible intervals
(CrI) for R0, stratified by the transmission event size, transmission
event duration and the assumed mean serial interval.

**Implementation**

All analysis was carried out using R version 3.6.2 \[7\]. The branching
process model was implemented using the `bpmodels` package \[8\]. The
analysis is available as an open-source R package \[9\]. A dockerfile
has been made available with the code to ensure reproducibility \[10\].

Results
-------

**Percentage of outbreak simulations accepted**

Overall, the highest acceptance rate was for scenarios with a large
event size (200), short duration (7 days), an R0 between 3 and 4,and a
12 day serial interval. (Figure 1). Scenarios with a SARS-like mean
serial interval (8.4 days), an R0 bounded between 2 and 3, a short
duration, and a relatively large event size (100) also had a high
acceptance rate compared to other scenarios. Across all scenarios a
higher acceptance rate was correlated with a larger event size, a
shorter event duration, and a larger mean serial interval. This is may
be related to the influence these parameters have on the degree of
volatility in outbreak simulations. Based on this trends in Figure 1
should be interpreted with care using prior knowledge. For example if
the event size, serial interval and event duration is assumed the
percentage of acceptance may be used to infer the most likely R0
scenario.

There were very few scenarios in which an upper bound on the
reproduction of 1 resulted in scenarios that were accepted after
conditioning on observed data, regardless of the mean serial interval,
event size, or event duration. There were also very few scenarios that
were accepted after conditioning on data for scenarios with an upper
bound of 2 on the R0 with this scenario being most likely if the
transmission event was large (200+), a longer duration, and a long mean
serial interval (12 days). For a short serial interval (4 days) the
percentage of accepted samples was low for all scenarios with the
highest accepted proportion for scenarios with an upper bound on the R0
of 2. Across all R0 bounds this scenario was most likely if the
transmission event was of a medium size (40 - 80 cases) and a short
duration (7-14 days).

![Heatmaps of the percentage of samples accepted by scenario. The figure
is stratified by the upper bound on the R0 (columns) and the mean of the
serial interval (rows).](figures/plot-probs-1.png)

**Estimated reproduction numbers**

Uncertainty in the R0 estimate increased as the event size decreased,
and decreased as the mean serial interval increased (Figure 2). Large
event sizes resulted in the lowest R0 estimates across all scenarios
evaluated. The estimated R0 decreased as the event size and duration
increased for both mean serial interval scenarios (Table 1 and Table 2).
Assuming a longer serial interval (12 days) resulted in an approximate
increase of 1 to the R0 estimates across all scenarios when compared to
the SARS-like (8.4 days) serial interval. For the SARS-like interval the
most likely scenario - with an event size of 100 and a duration of a
week) (Figure 1) - resulted in an estimated R0 of 2.2 - 3.2 (90% CrI,
Table 1). The most likely scenario with a mean serial interval of 12
days - with an outbreak size of 200 and a duration of 7 days - resulted
in an estimated R0 of 2.8 - 3.9 (90% CrI, Table 2). Across all mean
serial interval scenarios R0 estimates were comparable when event size
was decreased and event duration was increased.

![Density plot of reproduction number (R0) estimates from each accepted
sample stratified by transmission event size, event duration (columns),
and the mean serial interval used (rows). The black lines on each
density plot represent the 90% credible
interval](figures/density-r0-plot-1.png)

<table>
<caption>Median, minimum, and maximum reproduction numbers of the Wuhan outbreak conditioned on case data from the 25th of January - for scenarios with a mean serial interval of 8.4 (SARS-like). Stratified by initial transmission event size and duration.</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Transmission event size vs. Transmission event duration</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">7</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">14</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">21</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">28</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">20</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.7 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.3 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.1 - 3.8</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.8 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.3 - 3.8</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2 - 3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.8 - 3.2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">60</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.5 - 3.8</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.1 - 3.4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.8 - 3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.7 - 2.7</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">80</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.3 - 3.5</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.9 - 3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.7 - 2.6</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 - 2.3</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.2 - 3.2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.8 - 2.7</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.6 - 2.4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 - 2.2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">200</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.7 - 2.3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 - 2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.3 - 1.8</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.2 - 1.6</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">400</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.2 - 1.6</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.1 - 1.4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1 - 1.3</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">0.9 - 1.2</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<caption>Median, minimum, and maximum reproduction numbers of the Wuhan outbreak conditioned on case data from the 25th of January - for scenarios with a mean serial interval of 12. Stratified by initial transmission event size and duration.</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Transmission event size vs. Transmission event duration</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">7</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">14</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">21</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">28</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">20</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.6 - 3.6</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.2 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.8 - 4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.5 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.7 - 3.9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">60</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.5 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.2 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.8 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.4 - 3.9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">80</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.4 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.1 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.7 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.2 - 3.7</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">100</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3.5 - 4</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">3 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.5 - 3.8</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.1 - 3.4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">200</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.8 - 3.9</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">2.2 - 3.2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.9 - 2.7</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.7 - 2.4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">400</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.8 - 2.5</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.5 - 2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.3 - 1.7</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">1.2 - 1.6</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Discussion
----------

In this study, we explored a range of scenarios for the initial event
size and duration of the exposure event which initiated the 2019-20
Wuhan coronavirus outbreak. We conditioned on observed cases to
establish the probability of each scenario, given our model, and then
estimated the R0 of coronavirus. We found that there was a very low
probability that the reproduction numbers was less than 1 for any
scenario considered. Across all mean serial interval scenarios larger
exposure events over a shorter time horizon were most plausible. The
most probable SARS-like serial interval scenarios resulted in an
estimated R0 of 2.2 - 3.2 (90% CrI), whilst the most probable longer
serial interval scenarios resulted in an estimated R0 of 2.8 - 3.9 (90%
CrI). Reducing the event size led to estimates of the R0 increasing but
also reduced the proportion of samples accepted. Similarly, increasing
the event duration reduced the estimated R0 whilst decreasing the
proportion of accepted samples. Decreasing the event size whilst
increasing the duration resulted in R0 estimates that were comparable to
those from the most plausible scenarios.

Our study used a stochastic model to capture the transmission dynamics
of the outbreak with parameters informed from data were possible or
assumed to be similar to those estimated for SARS \[5\]. As the outbreak
progresses direct simulation may become too computationally demanding to
be practical so other approaches may be required. More data is likely to
become available, in particular disease specific estimates for the
serial interval, and case onset data, during the course of the outbreak.
This will make it possible to estimate the R0 with greater precision
with less risk of bias due to unknown parameters. The number of
scenarios that need to be evaluated may also be reduced as additional
information about cases connected to the initial exposure event becomes
available. Though our estimates had wide credible intervals it is
possible that we could not fully account for the numerous sources of
bias and uncertainty present in the available data. This means that our
model estimates may be both spuriously precise and potentially biased.
There is some evidence of this in our results as the scenarios with the
highest acceptance rate were on the edge of our scenario grid both for
event size, event duration, and mean serial interval. This may be the
result of these scenarios reducing volatility and therefore having
narrower distributions of estimated cases. Indeed, we found that R0
estimates were comparable as event size decreased and event duration
increased. Expert knowledge relating to the size and duration of the
intial event may help clarify this issue. Alternatively, other estimates
of R0 may be used to indicate which event size and event duration
scenarios are most plausible. A previous study also looked at varying
the event size and the impact that this had on R0 estimates using a
branching process \[4\]. Our work builds on this by also looking at
event duration, including reporting delays, and using a different
approach to condition on observed cases. For comparable scenarios, our
results were similar to those previously published but we found that R0
estimates were highly sensitive to variation in the assumed serial
interval, event size, and event duration. We made use of a highly
reproducible framework (an R package) and have released all of our code
as open-source \[9\]. This means that this analysis may be repeated -
both by the authors and others - as more data becomes available. In
addition, subject area experts may be able to adapt our analysis using
this open-source code to reduce the potential for bias using their
expert knowledge or privately held data.

As the outbreak progress more data will become available on the number
of cases, and the duration of the serial interval. These data are likely
to improve our estimates of the R0 and also alter the likelihood of
scenarios. Additional data may also lead to a reevaluation of the
suitability of the negative binomial distribution for generating new
cases - or at least provide an outbreak specific estimate of the
dispersion. More data may also allow other more complex analysis to be
done without risking incorporating significant biases. Our analysis did
not include interventions, such as case isolation, doing so may improve
our estimates. The R package we have developed alongside our analysis
may be generalisable to other point source outbreaks when time series
data on cases is unavailable or difficult to verify. Additional work is
needed to ensure the robustness of this tool but this may allow this
analysis to be repeated during future outbreaks with little additional
overhead.

This analysis use a stochastic branching process to explore scenarios
around the duration and size of the initial exposure event at the Huanan
seafood wholesale market in Wuhan. Despite the scarcity of data
currently available our estimates may be used to rule out some scenarios
and to assess the likelihood of others. Our results indicate that it is
very unlikely that the infectious agent responsible for the Wuhan
outbreak has a R0 of less than 1, unless the size of the transmission
event was much greater than currently reported. We also found that a
large initial exposure event was likely with a relatively short
duration. This corresponds with the evidence of rapid detection by
Public Health Officials in Wuhan. These scenarios resulted in R0
estimates that are comparable to those estimated during the 2002-2003
SARS outbreak. Unfortunately, we could not identify whether scenarios
with a SARS-like or longer serial interval were more likely. As more
information becomes available it may be possible to further refine our
results and establish the R0 of the outbreak more firmly. Providing
clear quantitative information for decision makers on the
transmissibility of coronavirus is of clear public health importance.
Our work to make this process reproducible may reduce the time these
estimates take to be made available in future outbreaks and increase
knowledge sharing across response teams.

**Contributors**

All authors conceived and designed the work. SA undertook the analysis
with advice from all other authors. SF developed the branching process
model. SA wrote the first draft of the paper and all authors contributed
to subsequent drafts. JH reviewed the analysis code. All authors approve
the work for publication and agree to be accountable for the work.

**Funding**

*Need funding statement*

**Competing interests**

There are no competing interests.

**Accessibility of data and programming code**

The code for this analysis, interim results, and final results can be
found at: *need zenodo DOI link*

References
----------

1 Imai N, Dorigatti I, Cori A *et al.* **Report 2: Estimating the
potential total number of novel Coronavirus cases in Wuhan City,
China**.
<https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fellowships/2019-nCoV-outbreak-report-22-01-2020.pdf>

2 Thompson RN. 2019-20 Wuhan coronavirus outbreak: Intense surveillance
is vital for preventing sustained transmission in new locations.
*bioRxiv* 2020;1–14.

3 **China coronavirus ’spreads before symptoms show’**.
<https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-51254523>

4 Imai N, Cori A, Dorigatti I *et al.* **Report 3: Transmissibility of
2019-nCoV**.
<https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fellowships/Imperial-2019-nCoV-transmissibility.pdf>

5 Lipsitch M. Transmission Dynamics and Control of Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome. *Science* 2003;**300**:1966–70.

6 Xu B, Gutierrez B, Hill S *et al.* Epidemiological Data from the
nCoV-2019 Outbreak: Early Descriptions from Publicly Available Data.
2020.

7 R Core Team. *R: A language and environment for statistical
computing*. Vienna, Austria:: R Foundation for Statistical Computing
2019. <https://www.R-project.org/>

8 Funk S. *Bpmodels: Analysing chain statistics using branching process
models*. 2020. <https://github.com/sbfnk/bpmodels>

9 Sam Abbott SF James Munday. *Bpmodels: Analysing chain statistics
using branching process models*. 2020.
<https://github.com/epiforecasts/WuhanSeedingVsTransmission>

10 Boettiger C. An introduction to Docker for reproducible research.
*ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review* 2015;**49**:71–9.
